Again, these are notes and sketches, not exact definitions and proofs. My goal is to acquire some knowledge about math behind ECC and pairing-based cryptography. I started with [2], then went to [1] to get algebraic geometry basics needed for [2], but then again I switched to [3] for the time being (and will definitely go back to [2]).

# [1]

First the correspondence between algebraic sets in affine and projective space and ideals in polynomial rings needs to be explored.

The monomials in R[X_1,...,X_n] are the polynomials X_1^i_1 * X_2^i_2 * ... * X_n^i_n where i_j are nonnegative integers. The degree of the monomial is i_1 + ... + i_n.

Polynomial is called homogeneous (or a form) of degree d, if all its monomials are of degree d.

An element a in a ring R is irreducible if is is not a unit of zero, and for any factorization a = b * c; b, c from R, either b or c is a unit.

The quotient field of k[X_1,...,X_n] is written k(X_1,...,X_n), and is called the field of rational functions in n variables over k.

If R is a UFD with quotient field K, then any irreducible element F from R[X] remains irreducible when considered in K[X].

If phi: R -> S is ring homomorphism, the set phi^(-1)(0) of elements mapped to zero is the kernel of phi, written as Ker(phi). Ker(phi) is ideal in R.

Let I be an ideal in a ring R. The residue class ring of R modulo I is written R/I and is the set of equivalence classes of elements in R under the equivalance relation: a ~ b if a - b from I.

The classes R/I form a ring in such a way that the mapping pi: R -> R/I is ring homomorphism.

The ring R/I is characterized by the following property: if phi: R -> S is a ring homomorphism to a ring S and phi(I) = 0, then there is a unique ring homomorphism phi1: R/I -> S such that phi = phi1(pi).

## Affine algebraic sets

### Affine space and algebraic sets

Let k be a field. By A^n(k) (or A^n) we denote the cartesian product of k with itself n times. A^(k) is the set of n-tuples of elements of k. A^1(k) is the affine line, A^2(k) the affine plane.

If F from k[X_1,...,X_n], a point P = (a_1,...,a_n) from A^n(k) is called a zero of F if F(P) = 0. If F is not a constant, the set of zeros of F is called the hypersurface defined by F.

More generally, if S is a set of polynomials in k[X_1,...,X_n], we define V(S) = {P from A^n; F(P) = 0 for all F from S}.

V(S) = intersection of V(F) for each F from S.

If S = {F1,...,Fr}, we write V(F1,...,Fr) instead of V({F1,...,Fr}).

Definition: a subset X of A^n is an (affine) algebraic set if X = V(S) for some S.

It can be quickly verified:

 * If I is the ideal in k[X_1,...,X_n] generated by S, then V(S) = V(I); so every algebraic set is equal to V(I) for some ideal I.
 * If {I_1,...,I_m} is a set of ideals, then V(I_1 ∪...∪ I_m) = V(I_1) ∩...∩ V(I_m), so the intersection of any collection of algebraic sets is an algebraic set. 
 * If I ⊂ J, then V(I) ⊃ V(J).
 * V(FG) = V(F) ∪ V(G) for any polynomials F, G.
 * V(I) ∪ V(J) = V({FG; F from I, G from J); so any finite union of algebraic sets is an algebraic set.
 * V(0) = A^n(k); V(1) = {}; V(X_1 - a_1,...,X_n - a_n) = (a_1,...,a_n). So any finite subset of A^n(k) is an algebraic set.

### Ideal of a set of points

X is a subset of A^n(k). Polynomials which maps points from X to 0 form an ideal, called the ideal of X, and written I(X). It can be quickly verified:

 * If X ⊂ Y, then I(X) ⊃ I(Y).
 * I({}) = k[X_1,...,X_n]; I(A^(k)) = (0) if k is an infinite field; I({(a_1,...,a_n)}) = (X_1 - a_1,...,X_n-a_n) for a_1,...,a_n from k.
 * I(V(S)) ⊃ S for any set S of polynomials; V(I(X)) ⊃ X for any set X of points.
 * V(I(V(S))) = V(S) for any set S of polynomials, and I(V(I(X))) = I(X) for any set X of points. So if V is an algebraic set, V = V(I(V)), and if I is the ideal of an algebraic set, I = I(V(I)).

An ideal that is the ideal of an algebraic set has a property not shared by all ideals: I(X) is a radical ideal for any X ⊂ A^n(k).

Definition: If I is any ideal in a ring R, we define the radical of I, written Rad(I), to be {a from R; a^n from I for some integer n > 0}. Rad(I) is an ideal containing I. An ideal is radical if I = Rad(I).

### Hilbert basis theorem

Theorem: Every algebraic set is the intersection of a finite number of hypersurfaces.

Proof: Let the algebraic set be V(I) for some ideal I ⊂ k[X_1,...,X_n]. It is enough to show that I is finitely generated, for if I = (F_1,...,F_r), then V(I) = V(F_1) ∩...∩ V(F_r).

The theorem is the consequence of the Hilbert basis theorem: 

Theorem 1: If R is a Noetherian ring, then R[X_1,...,X_n] is a Noetherian ring.

Definition: A ring is Noetherian if every ideal in the ring is finitely generated (fields are Noetherian rings).

Proof sketch of Hilbert basis theorem: Since R[X_1,...,X_n] is isomorphic to R[X_1,...,X_(n-1)][X_n], the theorem will follow by induction if we can prove that R[X] is Noetherian whenever R is Noetherian. Let I be an ideal in R[X]. We must find a finite set of generators for I.

If F = a_1 + a_2 * X + ... + a_d * X^d from R[X], a_d != 0, we call a_d the leading coefficient of F. Let J be the set of leading coefficients of all polynomials in I. J is an ideal in R, so there are polynomials F_1,...,F_r from I whose leading coefficients generate J. We then take an integer N larger than the degree of each F_i. For each m <= N, let J_m be the ideal in R consisting of all leading coefficients of all polynomials F from I such that deg(F) <= m. Each J_m is finitely generated, let's denote the corresponding (as above) polynomials for J_m as Poly_m. Let an ideal I1 be the ideal generated by F_1,...,F_r and polynomials from Poly_m for each m. It can be shown that I1 = I.

### Irreducible components of an algebraic set

An algebraic set may be the union of several smaller algebraic sets. An algebraic set V ⊂ A^n is reducible if V = V_1 ∪ V_2, where V_1, V_2 are algebraic sets in A^n, and V_i != V, i = 1,2. Otherwise V is irreducible.

Proposition 1: An algebraic set V is irreducible iff I(V) is prime.

Proof: If I(V) is not prime, we have F_1 * F_2 from I(V) and F_1, F_2 not from I(V). Because F_1 * F_2 vanishes on all V, each point on V is mapped to 0 either by F_1 or F_2. This means V ⊂ V(F_1) ∪ V(F_2). We can write V = (V ∩ V(F_1)) ∪ (V ∩ V(F_2)). In other direction: if V = V_1 ∪ V_2 where V_1 and V_2 are proper subsets, then we can choose F_i from I(V_i) which is not from I(V). Then F_1 * F_2 is from I(V), so I(V) is not prime. 

Lemma: Any nonempty collection of ideals in a Noeterian ring R has a maximal member (ideal that is not contained in any other ideal of this collection).

Consequently: Any collection of algebraic sets in A^n(k) has a minimal member.

Theorem 2: Let V be an algebraic set in A^n(k). Then there are unique irreducible algebraic sets V_1,...,V_m such that V = V_1 ∪ ... ∪ V_m and V_i not contained in V_j for all i != j. This is called decomposition of V into irreducible componets.

### Algebraic subsets of the affine plane A^2(k)

Proposition 2: Let F and G be polynomials in k[X, Y] with no common factors. Then V(F, G) = V(F) ∩ V(G) is a finite set of points.

Proof: We know that k(X)[Y] is a PID (principal ideal domain). In PID it holds: F, G from PID and gcd(F, G) = 1, then there exists R, S such that R * F + S * G = 1. We know k[X, Y] is isomorphic to k[X][Y], and we know that if F, G have no common factors in k[X][Y], then F, G have no common factors in k(X)[Y] (field of fractions). Thus there exists R, S from k(X)[Y] such that R * F + S * G = 1. We can multiply this equation with some nonzero D from k[X]: D * R * F + D * S * G = D. Now if (a, b) from V(F, G), we know that D(a) = 0. As D has finite zeros (polynomial of one variable), it means that V(F, G) contains only a finite number different X-coordinates. Similarly for Y-coordinates.

Corollary 1: If F is an irreducible polynomial in k[X, Y] such that V(F) is infinite, then I(V(F)) = F, and V(F) is irreducible.

Proof: Let't take G from I(V(F)). As F is irreducible, G and F have no common factors. By Proposition 2 this means V(F, G) has a finite number of points. This is contradiction, so I(V(F)) = F. That V(F) is irreducible follows from Proposition 1 (because I(V(F)) is prime).

Corollary 2: Suppose k is infinite. Then the irreducible algebraic subsets of A^2(k) are A^2(k), {}, points, and irreducible plane curves V(F), where F is an irreducible polynomial and V(F) is infinite.

Corollary 3: Assume k is algebraically closed, F a noconstant polynomial in k[X, Y]. Let F = F_1^n_1 * ... * F_r^n_r be the decomposition of F into irreducible factors. Then V(F) = V(F_1) ∪ ... ∪ V(F_r) is the decomposition of V(F) into irreducible components, and I(V(F)) = (F_1 * ... * F_r).

### Hilbert's Nullstellensatz

For a given algebraic set V, Proposition 2 tells whether V is irreducible or not (algebraic set V is irreducible iff I(V) is prime). But what about V, given a set of polynomials that define V?

Hilbert's Nullstellensatz: Let I be an ideal in k[X_1,...,X_n] where k is algebraically closed. Then I(V(I)) = Rad(I).

Corollary 1: If I is a radical ideal in k[X_1,...,X_n], then I(V(I)) = I. So there is a one-to-one correspondence between radical ideals and algebraic sets.

Corollary 2: If I is a prime ideal, then V(I) is irreducible. There is a one-to-one correspondence between prime ideals and irreducible algebraic sets.

## Affine varieties

From now on k will be a fixed algebraically closed field. Affine algebraic sets will be in A^n = A^n(k) for some n. An irreducible affine algebraic set is called affine variety.




# [2]

We have a perfect field K and a fixed algebraic closure of K (which we denote as K~ instead of the usual K with a line over it).

An algebraic set is a set of points P for which f(P) = 0 for each f from ideal I ⊂ K~[X]. If V is an algebraic set, the ideal of V is denoted as I(V).

```
I(V) = {f from K~[X]: f(P) = 0 for all P from V}
```

An algebraic set V is called an (affine) variety if I(V) is a prime ideal in K~[X].

A prime ideal is an ideal I such that if a * b from I, then either a from I or b from I.

I(V/K) = I(V) ∩ K[X]

Let I(V/K) be a variety (V is a variety defined over K). Affine coordinate ring of V/K is define by:

```
K[V] = K[X]/I(V/K)
```

K[V] is an integral domain. Its quotient field (field of fractions) is denoted by K(V) and is called the function field of V/K. Similarly are defined K~[V] and K~(V).

When studying geometric objects, the common question is whether they are reasonably "smooth". Let's say V is a variety, given by a single nonconstant polynomial equation f(X_1,...,X_N) = 0. By using Jacobian criterion for the existence of a tangent plane, we say a point P from V is singular iff:

```
(df/dX_1)(P) = ... = (df/dX_N)(P) = 0
```

Let's say we have two varieties:

```
V1: Y^2 = X^3 + X
V2: Y^2 = X^3 + X^2
```

It can be quickly checked that V1 has no singular points and V2 has a singular point in (0, 0).




[1] Fulton, William. "Algebraic curves." An Introduction to Algebraic Geom (2008): 54.

[2] Silverman, Joseph H. The arithmetic of elliptic curves. Vol. 106. Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.

[3] Cohen, Henri, et al., eds. Handbook of elliptic and hyperelliptic curve cryptography. CRC press, 2005.
